---
layout: post
title: How to ask for help with MySQL performance
---
Since discovering "StackOverflow":http://stackoverflow.com/ I've become hopelessly addicted (see the badge to the right). I answer the "mysql":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/mysql, "php":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/php, "zend-framework":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/zend-framework, and "javascript":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/javascript categories mostly.

My favorite category is mysql. These can be some of the most challenging questions to answer, particularly the query optimization ones. I often answer, having learned something myself in the process. 

Unfortunately, given the vast number of users, there are a lot of communication inconsistencies. It drives me batshit-crazy to read a textual description of a table. So I created a simple guide to getting people to help you with MySQL queries.

* *SHOW CREATE TABLE* - this is the best way to show someone your table schema. Don't try to describe it using plain-English, it just isn't good enough. It exposes your columns, field types (you said TIMESTAMP but you really have a DATETIME), and your indices all in one query.
* *USE EXPLAIN* - EXPLAINing your queries shows others where to start. It's ok if you don't understand it completely, but read the "documentation":http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.1/en/using-explain.html for the basics.
* *USE \G* - You have two ways to delimit your MySQL queries when using the mysql client. Using the DELIMITER, ; by default - or using \G. \G turns your columnar data into row data and limits the width to 80 chars. This is ideal for displaying on the web.

<br />
Read the "full article":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1204402/how-do-i-ask-for-help-optimizing-fixing-queries-in-mysql on StackOverflow.